Hello, everyone.
In this lesson, we're starting an entirely new chapter about something in WordPress called Full Site
Editing.
If this is your first time hearing about full site editing, that's okay.
Right now, our goal is to begin to answer the questions of, number one, what in the world is full
site editing?
And number two, what in the world is a block theme?
Well, I think instead of jumping right into a technical explanation, I think it's more intuitive to
just look at a sneak peek preview of the finished product of what we're going to be building together
in this chapter.
So right now on screen, this used to be the fictional university theme, the traditional theme with
AP templates.
However, off camera I've recreated it as a block theme and it now supports full site editing.
I realize we don't know what those terms mean yet, but right now let me walk you through some of the
new features that this approach enables or supports.
And don't worry that I built this off camera.
The entire point of this chapter is for you and I to rebuild this together step by step.
But right now, let's get a big picture overview of why it's interesting or useful in the first place.
So for example, in the past with the traditional theme, how would you change the homepage content?
Maybe you'd have to edit the actual PHP template files, or maybe you created an actual page in WordPress
named Home Page and then you could edit the WYSIWYG main body content.
But even doing that is not super intuitive for the end user.
So when you have a block theme instead of a traditional theme that supports full site editing, watch
how easy this is.
You would just go into your dashboard under appearance.
Click Editor.
By default, it's going to pull up the front page or home page template and now you can just start clicking
to edit.
So imagine if I wanted to change this content.
I can just click right here if I want to get rid of the exclamation or ad three, whatever.
I can change this subheadline.
Can change this.
We put it back.
You get the idea.
If I want this button to be medium or small or large, if I want to change the color for the button,
just click on it.
Use this button to slide out the right hand sidebar.
Maybe I want it to be light orange or blue.
Let's go with light orange instead of dark orange.
So I click save.
Well, let me actually add a change here so we can see it on the front end.
So if I had three dots click save refresh.
Perfect.
We see the light orange button in the new text.
Also down below on the home page you can see we've got our upcoming events from our blogs and then a
slideshow.
So what if I wanted the slideshow to sit above this event in blogs area?
Well, you can scroll down in the editor.
Here is the slideshow area.
Just use the editor screen arrow to move that up.
Click save back on the front end.
Cool.
So now you've got the Welcome Banner slideshow and then the events in our blogs.
I think you're already starting to see the pictures.
So the idea is that changes that in the past you might have had to make in a theme file.
Now you can just make directly from the WordPress editor, hence the name full site editing.
Let's say I'm not happy with these changes that I just made.
They are sort of weird changes.
So you can just go back, click on templates here.
Here's the front page template.
I can just click this icon and click Clear Customizations and it's going to go back to its default appearance
and settings.
Cool.
Let's walk through another example.
So let's go to an individual blog post screen or a single blog post screen.
So if I visit a blog post, imagine I want to add to the very bottom of this template file.
So right below the footer right about here, what if I wanted a slideshow to sit here or that upcoming
events and blog posts area.
What if I wanted that to sit here?
Well, in the past you would have no choice.
You would need to go in to single that AP right.
And edit the template file, but with a block theme.
Check this out.
We just go into the template screen here, look for the single post template.
Let's click on that to begin editing it because there's nothing truly dynamic or customizable about
the header, the footer or just the body content.
I just have placeholder blocks here.
We'll learn more about this approach of mine later on, but imagine right before the footer, I wanted
to add something so I could just click this.
Let me begin to search for slideshow, so I'll insert my custom slideshow.
BLOCK Just for this example, let's create a slideshow with two slides just so we don't spend too much
time.
So I'll add my first slide with a heading and I'll say The sky is blue.
Let me make that a medium sized heading.
Below that we can add a clickable button and we won't worry about where it's actually linking to.
But let's just say learn more.
Now, if we click on the slide itself.
So this area with the black background notice on the right hand side bar, we can choose an image.
So you can choose one of your existing images or you can upload a new one.
I'll just click a random one.
Cool.
Let's add slide number two.
So you click on the overall grey area.
That's the parent slideshow as a whole.
If I click on that, you can see there's a button down here to add a second slide.
So I'll just say slide number two.
We can leave that as a large headline.
Let's add a button that says Amazing and let's make that button orange instead of default blue.
Let's add a background image for the slide.
Let's go with this building.
So if I click save and then go refresh this individual blog post screen.
Cool.
So there is the blog post content.
And then down at the bottom there is our slideshow with our two slides.
The point here is that we modified this single blog post template without ever having to go into our
text editor, and we did so in a way that's still consistent with the design language and branding of
our theme, right?
These are the exact same slideshow styles that you would have seen on the homepage.
For one final example, I want to show you how we can really get creative here.
So imagine we were the end user or owner of this site and not a web developer.
And imagine we wanted to create a landing page.
So maybe just an interesting banner image area, a bit of text, and then no footer and no navigation
links.
Just a landing page, right.
Well, check this out.
If we go into WordPress, let me go back to the overall dashboard.
Let's create a new page.
So add new page.
I'll name this page.
Example, landing page.
Now, here's the cool part.
Under page template, I'm going to choose something called Brad's blank canvas.
Now, the name doesn't matter.
I just made this name up.
But if I select that, well, it's essentially giving me a blank slate.
So check this out.
If we add a paragraph that just says Lorem ipsum in, publish this page and then view it.
Cool.
So there's no header, there's no footer.
There's just a little bit of content.
However, due to the nature of a block theme and the way that I've set up my specific block theme,
we can use the power of composition, right?
And just start adding whichever blocks we want.
So let me get rid of Lorem ipsum.
Imagine if you did want the navigation up at the top.
Well, I have a block called Header.
But if you don't want that, you don't have to include it for this specific page.
So maybe we just want a banner area.
So I named it homepage banner.
I probably should have named it something more generic, like just banner.
But I can click that.
We choose a background image.
How about this dog?
Let me add a heading landing page.
Below that, we can even add a button.
Learn more.
Make it dark orange.
And then maybe we don't even want the universal site footer at the bottom of this page.
Maybe we just want upcoming events and blogs or, you know, any other block.
So maybe if I just search for events and blogs, add that if I click update and go refresh.
Cool.
It was that easy to create a completely custom template, right?
There's no site wide navigation at the top.
There's no footer at the bottom.
We just created a landing page.
Or, you know, you could have added any content you wanted.
So over the last five or 10 minutes, we've seen that you could very easily edit the homepage, right?
We learned how to edit this content and rearrange this content.
We've edited the single blog post template and we just set up a custom landing page template and we
did all of this without digging into our text editor.
So I am fully aware we have not answered the technical question of what is full site editing or what
is a block theme, right?
We have an answer to those questions from a technical or code perspective, but hopefully we've answered
them from the why would you even bother perspective, right?
Hopefully you've seen how the features that they enable are interesting or cool, or you could see how
they'd be useful for your clients or your end users.
From here, in our very next lesson, we are going to begin answering the questions from a technical
perspective.
So we'll actually start to look at the folder structure, the files, the code, so on and so forth.
There should be a lot of fun.
I'm excited to jump into this journey with you.
So let's keep things rolling and I will see you in the next lesson.